Introduction
------------

This is a small utility intended for use in extracting a school's
historical data from SchoolBase, ready for loading into iSAMS.

It was written for one particular school and was not intended as
a general-purpose product.  However, that school has given permission
for it to be released under the GPL, and it should greatly reduce
the amount of work needed to be done by other schools in the future.

It dumps some of the existing database tables in SchoolBase, then
re-structures the data as requested by iSAMS.

Because of the unfortunate choice of Excel files as the input
mechanism required by iSAMS, it is not possible fully to automate
the preparation.  (Or at least, I couldn't find a way to do it, and
iSAMS were unable to make any useful suggestions.  Others with more
familiarity with writing to Excel files may be able to suggest a
way.)

This utility writes CSV files which can then be manually injected
into iSAMS's Excel templates - one CSV file per sheet in a workbook.
As you do this, make sure you choose the right encoding (UTF-8) for
each CSV files.  Excel will try to guess the encoding, and whilst
its guess varies, in my experience it absolutely always got it wrong.


There are two further problems with this process, around which you
will have to negotiate with iSAMS.

1) Some of the fields specified in the iSAMS template are too short.
   1000 characters is not enough to hold the text of a report, and
   various other things.

2) There is a bug in Excel which means it fails to handle correctly
   fields containing an embedded line feed, even though the field is
   correctly quoted in the CSV file.  Two different approaches have
   been taken to get around this.

   For some of the affected text fields, this utility simply strips out
   the line feed characters.  The text comes across, but the formatting
   into separate paragraphs is lost.

   Where this was not acceptable (e.g. for academic reports) the utility
   writes the fields unchanged and I did eventually find a workaround
   which let me get them into Excel.  Open the CSV file in LibreOffice,
   being careful to specify the correct encoding (UTF-8).  The CSV importer
   in LibreOffice works correctly and preserves the line feeds.  Then
   save the new sheet in XLS or XLSX format, open it in Excel, and cut
   and paste the whole sheet into your Excel workbook.

   For some odd reason, Excel runs *incredibly* slowly - several minutes
   to open a file - when faced with a spreadsheet which has embedded line
   feeds in a file, but it does at least get there eventually.



Getting started
---------------

You will need a working copy of Ruby on your computer.  This is relatively
straightforward on Linux or MacOS, and not too difficult on Windows.  I would
suggest the use of RVM to get things set up quickly.  The version of Ruby
used for our extraction was 2.1.10, but anything later should be fine too.

Then you need a few Gems installed.  Look at code/extractor.rb for a
definitive list.  The two obvious ones are:

* charlock_holmes - used because our SB d/b at least had text within
                    it in various encodings.  The utility irons this out
                    and makes sure everything is in the same encoding,
                    UTF-8.  If you want to switch to something else, this
                    is probably best done at the stage of writing the
                    final CSV files.  You can specify it when opening the
                    files.

* tiny_tds          For access to the SB database.

Create a user ID on your SB database which has only read access and edit
code/extractor.rb to use that user name.  The password is entered
directly into the utility when it is run.

You also need some extra directories apart
from those created when you checked it out of git.  The relevant
directories are not stored in git because they contain school-specific
confidential information.

In parallel to the code directory you need:

  csv
  output
  yml

The csv directory is used to store the tables dumped from SchoolBase.
These are then processed to create the tables required by iSAMS, which
are written to the output directory.

The extractor works in two phases so that development work can be done
without needing immediate access to the SB database.  You do:

./extractor.rb --extract

to dump the SB tables to intermediate CSV files, and then:

./extractor.rb --generate

to do all the conversion work.  You can also do:

./extractor.rb --extract --generate

to do the whole thing in one go.

Type

./extractor.rb --help

to get information on other options, most of which relate to particular
little tweaks which we needed.

I would suggest setting up your database user, and then simply running
the utility and studying what comes out.  It will be structurally
correct from the point of view of the iSAMS templates, but will
need adjusting to suit your particular school.

You will want to tweak the output to suit your particular requirements.
For instance, the code will do a pretty good job of taking UK addresses
from the SchoolBase address fields and breaking them up appropriately for
the iSAMS fields, but presumably you will need to handle addresses for
whatever country you're dealing with.  Likewise, things like particular
rewards and sanctions which you have set up in SchoolBase will need to be
mapped to how you want them in iSAMS.

If there is an area you have decided not to transfer (e.g. medical records) you can simply ignore the corresponding output files.






As we worked with the iSAMS import process, a strange impression gradually
formed.  The iSAMS system itself is a mature, useful and fully-featured
piece of software and general impressions of it so far have been very good.

The data import mechanism is rather different.  I know iSAMS have imported
data for a lot of schools before, but nonetheless the templates and procedure
with which we were presented gave the impression of being rather new and
not fully tested.  Bits didn't work, or the documentation was wrong or
misleading.  In certain areas (re-admission of existing pupils being the
most obvious example) the data import process simply didn't seem to know
how to cope with it at all.

iSAMS really struggled to load our data, and didn't seem to be able to
explain why.  In the event, although we started our data loading in April,
they were still struggling to get some of it loaded without corrupting it
in late August.  Allow plenty of time for your data load, and check carefully
that all the contact information which you provide in your data files
makes it through the iSAMS data loader.  We had repeated instances of
whole contact records being lost, or the main record making it in, but
all the telephone numbers being lost.


At the sales stage, iSAMS presented us with a plan which called for one
data import, plus an "optional" data refresh.  There is no way the data
refresh is optional.  Given that time elapses between the original import
and your go-live date it is unavoidable that you will need a data refresh -
otherwise things will have changed in your existing MIS and won't be copied
over.

Unless you intend to import an incredibly minimal sub-set of existing
data (e.g. just a list of your current pupils and staff), or alternatively
you have someone on site who has done the process for a dozen schools
before, think in terms of an absolute minimum of three data imports.

1) Basically a sighting shot to discover how it works and
   allow you to do key staff training.
2) After fixing the dozens of problems which you will discover from 1.,
   this one lets you see whether your fixes are right.
3) The final one, just before the system goes live.

The sample SQL scripts provided are pretty much useless, and in some
cases downright misleading - e.g. the use of Y and N for fields which require
Yes and No.


Issues with the iSAMS import process as at Spring 2016
------------------------------------------------------


1) The use of Excel workbooks (see below)

2) There is an arbitrary limit of 1000 characters on text fields
   which is far too low.  This is a limit of the import process, not
   a limit of iSAMS.  It needs removing.

3) The importer checks exam candidate numbers (the 4 digit ones) and
   insists on global uniqueness.  This is the wrong check, and not
   the one used by the main system.  They can't be globally unique
   because they're too short.  The correct check is that no two
   *current* pupils have the same one.

4) There is no provision for migrating external exam candidates.  The
   sample export scripts (SQL) provided by iSAMS indicate that they
   should go in the Pupil file as current pupils, but this isn't actually
   the right place.  They have their own place to go in the exams module,
   but there isn't currently a corresponding import file.

5) In the Rewards and Sanctions template, it isn't made clear that there
   is a very low limit on how many types you can have.  Even in
   the iSAMS gui itself the system says you can have as many as you like,
   but the practical limit is about 5 or 6.  The system tries to display
   them all in a row, and with more than that the display is unusable.

   We made the mistake of importing about 25 different types from our
   previous MIS, meaning we then had to drop all this data and start
   again.

   Think in terms of having perhaps just 2 types - Positive and Negative,
   and then putting all your different rewards and sanctions in as
   categories in the level below that.

   We ended up with 4 types because we have two schools using the same
   system:

        Prep Rewards
        Prep Sanctions
        Senior Rewards
        Senior Sanctions

   The examples given in the relevant template of Categories are misleading
   because they all appear to be *reasons* for the reward or sanction (like
   smoking, or good attendance).  What should actually go in the categories
   section is the reward or sanction, and the reason should go in the pupil
   allocation sheet.  Thusly:

     Type: Sanction
       Category: Friday detention
         Pupil allocation: Smoking in the park

     Type: Reward
       Category: Head's praise
         Pupil allocation: Consistently good behaviour



6) In the Registrations area we also had problems.  SchoolBase (like iSAMS)
   lets you enter registration information in advance for pupils who are going
   to be absent by arrangement.  We dumped the whole of our registrations
   and loaded them successfully into iSAMS.

   *BUT* - because there were then future registration slots already in
   iSAMS, it flatly refused to let us create the actual registration
   slots which were needed.

   When transferring registration data it is vital to make sure you do not
   transfer any for future dates.  This should be made clear in the template.

7) In the Admissions template, the importer specifies that there can be
   only one instance of "Prospectus sent out" per candidate.  This does
   not reflect the way the main iSAMS system works - it is happy to record
   as many such events as you like.  The restriction appears to be arbitrary
   and should be removed.  UPDATE: Fixed in a new version - May 2016

8) In the Pupil Data workbook, documentation sheet.  The penultimate field
   of the pupil record (School Status) appears to have no explanatory
   comment.  This is because it is a multi-line comment, and the first line
   of the comment is a blank line!  Only when you've tried to load your
   pupil statuses and failed do you discover that unlike most such fields,
   this one has a fixed short list of possible values which you have to
   stick to.  If you use anything outside this list, the loader silently
   discards the information which you've given it.

   The comment is also wrong, in that it doesn't mention one of the
   permitted options - Full Boarder.

9) In the Admissions Template, Enquiries and Enrolment sheet, the Enquiry
   Notes field is limited to just 50 characters - barely enough for a
   sentence.  This is even sillier than the usual 1000 character limit.
   Again, no such limit exists in iSAMS itself.  UPDATE: Fixed May 2016

10) In the Sanatorium template, in the area of Permissions, the samples
    given are misleading.  There are two sheets - Parental Consent Types
    and Pupil Parental Consent.

    In the first one, there is no guidance in the comments, but the
    example given is "Agree to giving medication".  This would fit
    in with a list like:

      Agree to giving medication
      Refuse to allow medication
      No response received
      Contact parent before giving medication

    but apparently this isn't what is intended.  What are really needed
    in this sheet are entries like:

      Paracetomol
      Ibuprofen
      Entonox

    and in the next sheet you then put an entry for each pupil for whom
    the relevant consent has been given.  There is apparently no way of
    recording any nuances.  The system can take "Consent given" or
    "No information".  It seems it can't transfer refusals or anything
    like that.  This is an error in the design of the importer.  iSAMS
    itself has no problem recording a comment, but the importer tries
    to guess the value of one of the fields in the record instead of
    including it as part of the import data.  It always guesses "true",
    which is often wrong.

11) According to the Admissions template, the only two kinds of scholarship
    allowed are Discretionary Bursary or Vulnerable Group Bursary, suggesting
    that this area is intended just for bursaries.

    In fact you can put whatever you want here, so it's the correct place
    to put academic scholarships too.

12) Following on from 8. and 11. above, the notes in the templates do not
    always make clear whether a list of permitted values is exhaustive
    or merely a sample of what could be entered. (Or as in 10. above, just
    plain misleading.)

13) In the Pupil Data workbook, Pupils sheet, there is a field called
    "Name Initials".  What isn't made clear is that these should be
    the initials of just the pupil's forenames - not including his or
    her surname.
    It doesn't actually matter much, because the main system changes
    them anyway before you get a chance to see them.

14) There is a field called "Contact Only" in the pupil data pupil contacts
    sheet which is completely undocumented.  The comment just says "Contact
    Only" again.  We discovered during training what it means - it means
    that the system should ignore all the other merge flags - this contact
    should not be included in any mailings, mailing lists etc.  It would
    typically be set to Yes on any record for a work telephone number.

15) For visits in the Admissions workbook, the only place to put a note
    is on the event record, not on the pupil's connection to the event.
    It is therefore tempting to put in each visit as a separate event.
    iSAMS copes very badly with this - you end up with a pull-down menu
    with literally thousands of identical entries.

    You must merge all simultaneous visits into one event record, and
    ideally add some date information to the name.

16) There are odd fields which just seem to have been forgotten in the
    design of the import templates - like "Official name" in the first
    page of student information.

17) When iSAMS imported our data they had immense problems loading contact
    information without losing large chunks of it.  Examining the Excel
    workbooks provided to them one could see that one pupil for instance
    had contact records for 5 people attached to him.  Once the load had
    been completed there would be only 2 still attached.

    Similarly, some contact records would be loaded, but in the process
    would lose all their telephone numbers.  Checking the Excel spreadsheets
    showed that the telephone numbers were definitely there before the
    load, but for some reason they were not loaded.



Reasons why Excel documents are a bad choice as a data transfer mechanism.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

At first sight, the use of Excel documents to transfer data into iSAMS
seems attractive.  Lots of people with little experience of data handling
can nonetheless use Excel and will be happy using it.  You can also easily
examine your data.

There are however sufficient problems that they're not a good choice - better
options are available.


1) Excel file format is not one format.  It differs between different
versions of Excel, and some versions of Excel can't read files written
by other versions.  The obvious two formats are XLS and XLSX, but there
are subtle (and not so subtle) differences even within these.

2) The file format is closed and undocumented.  Although Microsoft put
up a version of its XLSX spreadsheet file format for ISO approval (and
achieved said approval by some very shady means) even that format is
not fully documented.  The version which achieved ISO approval is different
from the version which they actually use - the ISO-approved version has never
been implemented.

3) XLS files are limited to 64K records per sheet.  XLSX files are limited
to 1M records per sheet.  Neither of these limits is big enough to handle
the data being transferred.

4) Even Microsoft's own tools (OLE) can't write reliably to XLS(X) files.
Fields longer than 256 bytes are rejected, and random extra formatting
is added.  The latter problem is not a big issue, but the former is a show-
stopper.  The only way of getting the data into the spreadsheets is
therefore cut-and-paste, which brings us to item 6 below.

5) Third party tools do exist for writing to XLS(X) files but I was
unable to find one which would write to existing files of both types.
Most tools seem to want to create a new file, but apparently it is necessary
to use the blank templates provided by iSAMS.

6) The process of creating the spreadsheets thus has to involve manual
intervention - either cutting and pasting or importing from text files -
with the inevitable greatly raised risk of making a mistake.  Data export
and import needs to be fully scripted and automated to be sufficiently
reliable.  There are 111 separate sheets to which data potentially need to
be added.  The chances of even the most dedicated operator managing this
without error every time are pretty small.

7) Excel does not cope with line breaks within a field.  If you try to import
data containing a line break within a field from a CSV file, it ends the
field and continues the data on a fresh row, even though the field contents
were correctly quoted.  This thus means you can't import any notes containing
separate paragraphs.

Addendum: I've found a work-around for this, although it's extremely
tedious.  If you write your CSV file using <CR><LF> for the line breaks
within a field, and then open the file using Excel (N.B - do not try to
import it into an existing Workbook - you must open it by double clicking
on the CSV file) then you can get the data into Excel with line breaks within
a field.  You can then cut and paste the data from one Excel window to
another.  For some odd reason, Excel takes much, much longer to open a file
like this, but it does actually work.

Further addendum: It isn't actually a practical work-around, because you
then lose the ability to tell Excel what encoding your CSV file uses.
When you explicitly import a CSV file, Excel guesses the encoding (and
whilst its guess varies, it absolutely always gets it wrong) and then
lets you choose the right one.  If you double-click on a CSV file, it just
pulls it in without asking you what the encoding is.

8) Because we're dealing with large binary files without version control,
there is a further risk in the process of manually copying them around.
On at least one occasion, the file which I think I sent was not the file
which iSAMS claim to have received, but the previous version.  One of us
made a mistake and used the old one.  This sort of mistake is inevitable
without a proper version control system.

9) Excel feels it is entitled to make changes to the data which you enter
without consulting you.  This can lead to erroneous data in your final
file.  For instance, if a telephone number has been entered without
spaces as "01234567891", Excel decides that this is a number and can therefore
have the leading 0 removed.  To prevent this, you have to make sure that all
your telephone numbers have at least one space in them.

10) Likewise with dates.  The iSAMS documents specify that dates should
be given in UK format.  E.g. "26/10/1996".  This is not a good choice
because it is potentially ambiguous for some dates.  A better choice would
be ISO format - "1996-10-26".  However, because the data are held in Excel
spreadsheets, the actual format becomes fluid - it will depend on the locale
settings of the particular copy of the Excel software which is being used.
One user will open the file and see "26/10/1996", whilst another will open
the same file and see "10/26/1996".


What is needed when transferring a whole school's data is a data transfer
mechanism which is reliable, and most importantly, 100% reproducible.  This
means it must involve the absolute minimum of manual intervention - preferably
none at all.  The use of Excel files makes this target unachievable.

A better choice would be to make use of a well defined text file format -
either CSV or XML would be a good choice - with a defined character
encoding.  UTF-8 seems to be winning the popularity battle, but any of
the other well-defined ones would do, as long as it is clearly specified.
CSV has the advantage of being quick to load into a spreadsheet, allowing
the data to be examined by end users.

A further advantage of using text files for the transfer is that you can
then store them under a distributed version control system - e.g. git
or mercurial - and get meaningful information about differences between
versions.  (You can store binary files like Excel workbooks in version
control systems, but you can't get meaningful diffs.)

Further, the school can check new versions into the VCS, and iSAMS can
check them out, obviating the need for insecure file transfer and completely
removing any doubt about which version of a file is the current one.  A
completely history can be kept of the data transfer process, making it
much more likely that exactly the right data will be transferred.  This
is especially important when one comes to the data refresh before the new
iSAMS system goes live.


